---
layout: post
title: Guaranteed Basic Income and Expanded Wage Insurance
author: China Layne
thumbnail: "/assets/GIGOThumb.png"
categories: [employmentresearch, essay]
---
In the last couple of years, [Guaranteed Basic Income (GBI)](http://basicincome.org/) has been gaining traction among researchers and advocacy groups concerned about economic inequality and poverty. In its basic form, GBI involves giving every adult citizen of a country an amount of money that could cover all of the person’s basic needs, regardless of whether the person is employed. Advocates for GBI propose that the program would replace most other safety net spending for the poor such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). In recent years, GBI has been piloted in a variety of developing countries such as Namibia, Brazil, and India as well in developed countries such as Germany, Canada, and the United States.

In January of this year, the Obama administration introduced an [expanded wage insurance program (EWI)](https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/01/16/new-reforms-strengthen-support-unemployed-workers) as part of the 2017 budget proposal. The U.S. currently implements two wage insurance or supplement programs: the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), which provides a refundable tax credit to supplement the earnings of low-wage workers with children and the Alternative Trade Adjustment Assistance (ATAA) program, which supplements the earnings of workers aged 50 years and older earning less than $50,000 a year whose previous job was lost due to foreign trade. The administration’s proposal for a EWI program would make the benefit available to a larger population by eliminating the age threshold and the requirement that workers have to be displaced by foreign trade. If implemented, EWI would, for up to two years, support a wide variety of workers whose jobs were displaced as they reestablish themselves in new jobs, industries, or occupations.

There are significant concerns about implementing either guaranteed basic income or expanded wage insurance. Economists point to a moral hazard problem for EWI, namely that providing supplemental wages will encourage workers to take lower-earning or lower-skilled jobs than they otherwise would, thereby reducing overall productivity. In addition, a EWI program that is not paired with extensive job retraining or vocational education services may ultimately be a policy “Band-Aid”; a short-term palliative that doesn’t address the core issues driving job displacement. Similarly, GBI has its own moral hazard problem, namely that potentially productive workers will disconnect from the workforce entirely rather than take low-wage, unsatisfying jobs. In addition, there may be unfortunate, long-term consequences to facilitating non-work among adults in a country where most people’s identity stems in large part from employment and where non-work sources of socialization (such as civic organizations, organized religion, and volunteering) are in decline.

Both guaranteed basic income and expanded wage insurance are promoted as ways to respond to technological, trade, and economic disruptions in the labor market and to ensure the economic well-being of people whose jobs are, or likely will be, displaced. However, GBI and EWI represent fundamentally different ways of thinking about and responding to the issues of economic insecurity and labor market volatility. By directly providing an income to cover the basic needs of all adults, GBI presents a future where paid employment is optional, the individual is the best (and sole) responder to economic turbulence, and labor market volatility is a permanent condition that will leave some workers permanently redundant. Through providing money to supplement the earnings of displaced workers for a limited time, EWI suggests that labor market volatility is something that can be managed through policy, keeping adults engaged in the workforce is important, and the government can help buffer workers from the extremes of economic insecurity. GBI and EWI illustrate that how we as a society respond to current and future labor market changes reflects how we think about: (1) the centrality of employment to a well-functioning society, (2) whether employment insecurity and volatility are permanent conditions or transitory events, and (3) what role government should play in supporting workers during times of economic turbulence. Time will tell how effective either of these responses turns out to be and how well the views underpinning these responses actually reflect the reality of the American labor market.
